# Patch 1: Self-evaluation and reflection

```{note}
Submitted on 2020/12/31.
This is a reflection on my current knowledge and skills in teaching, as well as
my plans for future development.
```

## Teaching skills

Previous teaching experience and qualifications, classroom and online
teaching, facilitating, mentoring and coaching skills, planning, assessment,
etc.

### üí™üèΩ Strengths

My previous teaching experience includes 3 years designing, delivering, and
assessing undergraduate courses in Brazil, as well as several online and
in-person workshops on a range of topics. This has provided me with hands-on
experience in many dimensions of the {term}`UKPSF` (A1-4, K1-5, V1-2). To
acquire formal pedagogy training, I completed the {term}`Software Carpentry`
Instructor Training Program, which focuses on research-informed pedagogy
including various aspects of lesson design, how students learn, learning
evaluation and feedback, among others. I also have experience in mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students, which is supplemented by self-reflection
and sharing of experiences with colleagues.

### üõ†Ô∏è Areas for development

Formal training in mentoring would be very beneficial since I am mostly
self-taught by following my instincts and emulating good practices from others.
Another area where further CPD would be beneficial is in assessing learning
during the course through formative activities and adapting to results in real
time. I find this difficult to implement in practice, in particular because of
the lack of time (both to think deeply and research the subject and also to fit
in an already full module timetable).

## Knowledge of learning and teaching

Other teaching/training qualifications, courses/workshops attended, reading
around learning, teaching and assessment, application of theory to practice,
etc.


### üí™üèΩ Strengths

Besides personal experience, I also have a teaching qualification from the
{term}`Software Carpentry` (SWC) organisation. The approach taught by the SWC
when designing a module is: start from the learning objects (LO), then work
backwards by (1) creating summative assessments that test knowledge of the key
LOs, (2) creating formative assessments to gage progress, (3) create the actual
content that gets students from one formative assessment to the next. I have
used aspects of this when teaching and its definitely help me to avoid content
bloat and focus on the important concepts that are needed to achieve the LOs.
My reading is mostly concentrated on blogs and other internet content created
by other practicing lecturers in my own field and adjacent subjects. I also
regularly attend sections on teaching and learning at academic conferences and
participate in professional discussion groups around teaching practice.

### üõ†Ô∏è Areas for development

More extensive reading of current pedagogical literature and foundational text
books to supplement the anecdotal accounts I already consume on a regular
basis. I struggle with the application of some of the practices I am already
familiar with, in large part due to the short time available. More knowledge of
practical applications of pedagogical techniques to my particular field would
certainly help with that since it would require less time to implement. I also
lack experience with the quality assurance and moderation practices implemented
in the UK.


## Characteristics of a lecturer

Qualities, knowledge and skills brought to teaching, subject knowledge,
inspiring students, active learning, willingness to try out new approaches,
etc.

### üí™üèΩ Strengths

I am fairly comfortable in the classroom and have little difficulty in engaging
and connecting with students. I rely heavily on computational tools to aid my
teaching (digital notebooks, programming, interactive exercises). These are
particularly useful as guided activities for active learning, where students
can interact and experiment with real data, theory, and abstract concepts. I
always try to build on the programming skills that the students are already
acquiring in other modules, which are in very high demand in all industries. I
have a fairly broad understanding of difference subjects in my own and adjacent
fields and can bridge gaps between modules. I endeavour to make my teaching
accessible to students from different backgrounds by providing as much of the
prerequisite knowledge as possible at the start and providing resources for
filling in any remaining gaps. I continuously iterate and improve my teaching
material and technique given the outcomes and formal/informal feedback received
from students and my peers.

### üõ†Ô∏è Areas for development

My experience with creating accessible teaching material and lectures to cater
to students special needs and different learning styles could also be improved.
Inspiring students to engage with material in an online setting is particularly
challenging and needs improvement.

## Subject knowledge and other relevant skills/attributes

Range and depth of subject knowledge, both own subject and learning and
teaching, interpersonal skills, communication skills, etc.

### üí™üèΩ Strengths

As previously stated, I have a fairly broad knowledge of my field of study and
deep knowledge both of my particular research field and computational skills.
The computational side allows my to provide students with highly valued
transferable skills in programming and data analysis. I have some understanding
of the scholarship around teaching and learning and good communication skills.
I have always had an interest in the public dissemination of scientific
knowledge through the use of technology (websites, animations) and video
platforms, which proved to be very useful during this past year of online
teaching.

### üõ†Ô∏è Areas for development

Since most modules I teach are outside my direct expertise, I need to improve
and update my knowledge of these subjects to be able to bring in more modern
concepts, techniques, data, and use cases. I could also benefit from more
formal training in pedagogy theory and the practical implementation of these
concepts in my own field.


## Professional skills framework

Based on the "Areas of Activity" defined on page 3 of the {term}`UKPSF`.

### üí™üèΩ Strengths

I have experience and am fairly confident in my ability to design and plan
learning activities, deliver teaching and support for learning, and develop
effective learning environments. I have engaged with professional development
activities for pedagogy in the past and have experience with assessment and
providing feedback to learners.

### üõ†Ô∏è Areas for development

My biggest areas for development are in designing effective assessments (both
summative and formative) and the quantitative evaluation of my teaching
practices so that I can use this data to improve in the future in a more
targeted way.

## Reflection

My self-evaluation showed appropriate level to meet the [D2](d2) for all
dimensions except for {term}`A5`, K5, V1, V2, and V4. Through my past
experience, I have also identified room for improvement in teaching assessment
(A3 and K5), quality assurance / moderation (K6), accessibility (V1), and the
wider context of higher education in the UK (V4), which were the key things I
hoped to acquire from PGCAP. I see now the need to increase my participation in
CPD activities offered by the University and other professional bodies as a way
to improve on these dimensions and meet descriptors I, II, and VI. I will
search for new ways to promote wider participation, including engaging with
outreach activities developed by my department, as a way to meet descriptor
III. Another action point is to search and read more of the pedagogical
literature for my particular field to support my current teaching practices or
provide insights for improvements that can be implemented within the tight time
constraints (meeting description V).

## Literature

Key pedagogic literature read or intend to read to support my teaching
practices.

Have read:

* {term}`Software Carpentry` instructor [training manual](https://carpentries.github.io/instructor-training/)
* "How learning works" {cite}`ambrose2010learning`
* ["Teaching and Learning with Jupyter" by Barba et al.](https://jupyter4edu.github.io/jupyter-edu-book/)

Will read:

* "Building a better teacher" {cite}`green2014building`
* "Experiences With Efficient Methodologies for Teaching Computer Programming
  to Geoscientists" {cite}`jacobs2016experiences`
